add visual editor docs (#5603)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/cloud/use-visual-editor.md

---
title: "Use the visual editor" 
id: use-visual-editor      
sidebar_label: "Use the visual editor" 
description: "Access and use the visual editor to create or edit dbt models through a visual, drag-and-drop experience inside of dbt Cloud." 
---

# Use the visual editor <Lifecycle status='beta'/> 

:::tip Beta feature

> The visual editor provides users with a seamless and drag-and-drop experience inside of dbt Cloud. It's available in private beta for [dbt Cloud Enterprise accounts](https://www.getdbt.com/pricing). To join the private beta, [register your interest](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScPjRGyrtgfmdY919Pf3kgqI5E95xxPXz-8JoVruw-L9jVtxg/viewform) or reach out to your account team to begin this process.

Author: ```suggestion
The visual editor provides users with a seamless and drag-and-drop experience inside of dbt Cloud. It's available in private beta for [dbt Cloud Enterprise accounts](https://www.getdbt.com/pricing). 

To join the private beta, [register your interest](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScPjRGyrtgfmdY919Pf3kgqI5E95xxPXz-8JoVruw-L9jVtxg/viewform) or reach out to your account team to begin this process.
```

---

> title: "Use the visual editor" 

Reviewer: sugg: to describe what can be done with the editor and also less repetition since this page is underneath the "Visual editor" top-level sidebar 

```suggestion
title: "Edit and create dbt models" 
```

Author: good suggestion, will fold it in

Author: not going to update the filename though as it could be confusing with the overall edit and create dbt models workflow.

id: use-visual-editor      
sidebar_label: "Use the visual editor" 
description: "Access and use the visual editor to create or edit dbt models through a visual, drag-and-drop experience inside of dbt Cloud." 

> pagination_next: "docs/cloud/use-visual-editor"

Author: ```suggestion
pagination_next: "docs/cloud/visual-editor-interface"
```

# Use the visual editor <Lifecycle status='beta'/> 

:::tip Beta feature
The visual editor provides users with a seamless and drag-and-drop experience inside of dbt Cloud. It's available in private beta for [dbt Cloud Enterprise accounts](https://www.getdbt.com/pricing). 

To join the private beta, [register your interest](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScPjRGyrtgfmdY919Pf3kgqI5E95xxPXz-8JoVruw-L9jVtxg/viewform) or reach out to your account team to begin this process.
:::

> 

Reviewer: i think our best practice here is to start the page with at least a short paragraph vs a callout. i recall getting review comments from matt and/or leona that a page that starts with a callout negatively impacts our SEO. i forget the details atm tho. would be good to check-up on it, i think

Author: i think you can have both - if the content is relevant (e.g. enterprise and beta), has keywords, and helpful to the user, the SEO impact is probably minimal. especially if the search engine's understanding of the page content is clear. from my experience, users like to have the important info first, rather than need to read to introductory paragraph and then find out if they ca use it or not.

however, this has inspired me to do something I've been wanting to try for a while and i think i can meet you halfway here and add introductory text after the title and then the callout, satisfying both our points:
![Screenshot 2024-06-05 at 12 00 26](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/89008547/06928375-0e9a-470b-aa7b-f1823e503b45)

Reviewer: this is super duper cool!

---
title: "Edit and create dbt modelsr" 
id: use-visual-editor      
sidebar_label: "Edit and create dbt models" 
description: "Access and use the visual editor to create or edit dbt models through a visual, drag-and-drop experience inside of dbt Cloud." 
---

# Edit and create dbt models <Lifecycle status='beta'/> 

<p style={{ color: '#717d7d', fontSize: '1.1em' }}>
Access and use the dbt Cloud visual editor to create or edit dbt models through a visual, drag-and-drop experience. Use the built-in AI for custom code generation in your development experience.
</p>

:::tip Beta feature
The visual editor provides users with a seamless and drag-and-drop experience inside of dbt Cloud. It's available in private beta for [dbt Cloud Enterprise accounts](https://www.getdbt.com/pricing). 

To join the private beta, [register your interest](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScPjRGyrtgfmdY919Pf3kgqI5E95xxPXz-8JoVruw-L9jVtxg/viewform) or reach out to your account team to begin this process.
:::

## Prerequisites

> - You have an active [dbt Cloud Enterprise](https://www.getdbt.com/pricing) account.

Author: ```suggestion
- You have a [dbt Cloud Enterprise](https://www.getdbt.com/pricing) account.
```

> - You have a [developer license](/docs/cloud/manage-access/seats-and-users) ??? WHO can access editor? dev license? read-only?

Author: dev license required and dev credentials - yes?

Author: dev license
keep on latest

Author: can't create source model from this. need to have prod run that has sources created.

- You have a dbt Cloud project created already with dev credentials set up.
- Successful job run on Production or Staging [environment](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments)
- Have AI-powered features toggle enabled

## Access visual editor

Before accessing the editor, you should have a dbt Cloud project already set up. This includes a Git repository, data platform connection, environments, and developer credentials. If you don't have this set up, please contact your dbt Cloud Admin.

To access the visual editor:

> - Type in the following URL, replacing the ACCOUNT_ID and ENVIRONMENT_ID with your own account and environment ID: `https://ACCESS_URL/visual-editor/ACCOUNT_ID/env/ENVIRONMENT_ID/`

Author: is this the current way to access the editor right now (before it goes under the dev tab)?

Author: keep as it rn

	- The Code tab displays the SQL code generated by the node's configuration. Use this to see the SQL for your visual model config.
3. Connect the operators by using the connector by dragging your cursor between the operator's "+" start point and linking it to the other operators you want to connect to. This should create a connector line. 
	- Doing this allows the data to flow from the source table through various transformations you configured, to the final output.
5. Keep building your dbt model and ensure you confirm the out through the **Output** tab.

<!-- 
### Configure nodes
- Built-in AI code generator

### View output
-->

## Edit an existing model
To edit an existing model, navigate to the visual editor and click on the **Edit a model** button on the upper right. This will allow you to select the model you'd like to edit.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/edit-model.jpg" width="90%" title="Edit a model iin the visual editor using the 'Edit a model' button." />

## Version control

Testing and documenting your models is an important part of the development process.  

> Stay tuned—coming soon, the visual editor will allow you to version-control your dbt models, ensuring that you can track changes and revert to previous versions if needed.

Author: ```suggestion
Stay tuned! Coming very soon, you'll be able to version control your dbt modes in the visual editor. This ensures you can track changes and revert to previous versions if needed.
```

> 

Author: how to save created / modified models? how to ensure they're ran in prod jobs?

Author: design coming
can version control is coming soon

> ## Limitations

Author: how to integrate with explorer and ide?

Author: no integrations yet, once we can save branch, they'll be able open the branch in ide.

- You have a [developer license](/docs/cloud/manage-access/seats-and-users) with developer credentials set up
- You have an existing dbt Cloud project already created
- You are [Keep on latest](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#keep-on-latest-version) for a versionless experience
- Successful job run on Production or Staging [environment](/docs/dbt-cloud-environments)
- Have AI-powered features toggle enabled

## Access visual editor

Before accessing the editor, you should have a dbt Cloud project already set up. This includes a Git repository, data platform connection, environments, and developer credentials. If you don't have this set up, please contact your dbt Cloud Admin.

To access the visual editor:
- Type in the following URL, replacing the ACCOUNT_ID and ENVIRONMENT_ID with your own account and environment ID: `https://ACCESS_URL/visual-editor/ACCOUNT_ID/env/ENVIRONMENT_ID/`
  - The environment ID must have had runs that generated catalogs in it.

- For example, if my region is North America multi-tenant, account ID is 10, environment ID with a generated catalog run is 100, my URL should be:

  - `https://cloud.getdbt.com/visual-editor/10/env/100/`

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/visual-editor.jpg" width="80%" title="Visual editor interface that contains a node toolbar and canvas." />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/visual-editor.png" width="80%" title="Visual editor interface that contains a node toolbar and canvas." />
```

## Create a model
To create a dbt SQL model, click on **Create a new model** and perform the following steps. Note that you can't create source models in the visual editor. This is because you need to have production run with sources already created.

1. Drag an operator from the operator toolbar and drop it onto the canvas.
2. Click on the operator to open its configuration panel:

> 	- **Table**: Select the table and columns you want to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	- **Model**: Select the table and columns you want to use.
```

> 	- **Model**: Select the table and columns you want to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	- **Model**: Select the model and columns you want to use.
```

	- **Join**: Define the join conditions and choose columns from both tables.

> 	- **Select**: Pick the columns you need from the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	- **Select**: Pick the columns you need from the model.
```

	- **Formula**: Add the formula to create a new column. Use the built-AI code generator to help generate SQL code by clicking on the question mark (?) icon. Enter your prompt and wait to see the results.
	- **Filter**: Set the conditions to filter data.
	- **Order**: Select the columns to sort by and the sort order.
	- **Limit**: Set the maximum number of rows you want to return.
3. View the **Output** and **SQL Code** tabs. 
	- Each operator has an Output tab that allows you to preview the data from that configured node.
	- The Code tab displays the SQL code generated by the node's configuration. Use this to see the SQL for your visual model config.
4. Connect the operators by using the connector by dragging your cursor between the operator's "+" start point and linking it to the other operators you want to connect to. This should create a connector line. 
	- Doing this allows the data to flow from the source table through various transformations you configured, to the final output.
5. Keep building your dbt model and ensure you confirm the out through the **Output** tab.

<!-- 
### Configure nodes
- Built-in AI code generator

### View output
-->

## Edit an existing model

> To edit an existing model, navigate to the visual editor and click on the **Edit a model** button on the upper right. This will allow you to select the model you'd like to edit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To edit an existing model, navigate to the Visual Editor, click on the **Get Started** button on the upper right, and click **Edit existing model**. This will allow you to select the model you'd like to edit.
```

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/edit-model.jpg" width="90%" title="Edit a model iin the visual editor using the 'Edit a model' button." />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/visual-editor/edit-model.png" width="90%" title="Edit a model in the visual editor using the 'Edit a model' button." />
```
